Add docs for app middleware (#2862)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/middleware.md

weight: 50
description: "Customize processing pipelines by adding middleware components"
aliases:
  - /developing-applications/middleware/middleware-overview/
  - /concepts/middleware-concept/
---

Dapr allows custom processing pipelines to be defined by chaining a series of middleware components. There are two places that you can use a middleware pipeline;

1) Building block APIs - HTTP middleware components are executed when invoking any Dapr HTTP APIs.

> 2) Service-to-Service innvocation - HTTP middleware components can also be applied to service-to-service invocation calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) Service-to-Service invocation - HTTP middleware components are applied to service-to-service invocation calls.
```

## Configuring API middleware pipelines

> When launched, a Dapr sidecar constructs a middleware processing pipeline for incoming HTTP calls. By default the pipeline consists of [tracing middleware]({{< ref tracing-overview.md >}}) and CORS middleware. Additional middleware, configured by a Dapr [configuration]({{< ref configuration-concept.md >}}), can be added to the pipeline in the order they are defined. The pipeline applies to all Dapr API endpoints, including state, pub/sub, service invocation, bindings, secrets, configuration, distributed lock and others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When launched, a Dapr sidecar constructs a middleware processing pipeline for incoming HTTP calls. By default, the pipeline consists of [tracing middleware]({{< ref tracing-overview.md >}}) and CORS middleware. Additional middleware, configured by a Dapr [configuration]({{< ref configuration-concept.md >}}), can be added to the pipeline in the order they are defined. The pipeline applies to all Dapr API endpoints, including state, pub/sub, service invocation, bindings, secrets, configuration, distributed lock, and others.
```

spec:
  httpPipeline:
    handlers:
      - name: oauth2
        type: middleware.http.oauth2
      - name: uppercase
        type: middleware.http.uppercase
```

As with other building block components, middleware components are extensible and can be found in the [supported Middleware reference]({{< ref supported-middleware >}}) and in the [components-contrib repo](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/middleware/http).

{{< button page="supported-middleware" text="See all middleware components">}}

> ## App Middleware (Preview)

Reviewer 2: If this is preview then you need to enable this view a preview feature flag? 
You also need to update https://docs.dapr.io/operations/support/support-preview-features/
Add Note heading here rather than in the header.

> Http middleware are executed when invoking Dapr HTTP API directly. There are other types of middlewares that should be applied in the context of app protocol, they are called app middleware and they are also executed when making service-to-service invocations. Valid use cases are token validation in a zero-trust environment or request transformation for a specific app endpoint.

Reviewer 2: This implies there are two types of middleware, when the feature here is enabling middleware components for service-to-service invocation calls. I would reword this as follows

```suggestion
HTTP middleware components are executed when invoking Dapr HTTP APIs using the `httpPipeline` configuration. You can also use any middleware components when making service-to-service invocation calls for example for token validation in a zero-trust environment, request transformation for a specific app endpoint or apply OAuth policies.
```

> The same set of middlewares that can be applied to http middleware can also be applied to app middleware but instead of using `httpPipeline` you should use `appHttpPipeline`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any middleware component that can be applied to HTTP middleware can also be applied to service-to-service invocation calls as a middleware component using`appHttpPipeline` configuration. The example below adds the `uppercase` middleware component for all outbound calls from the application that this configuration is applied to.
```

Reviewer 2: This is a fairly weak example. Could you provide a more compelling example with the existing middleware components?

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
  name: pipeline
  namespace: default
spec:
  appHttpPipeline:
    handlers:
      - name: uppercase
        type: middleware.http.uppercase
```

> Keep in mind that app middleware are always executed regardless of used Dapr Protocol, when declaring both, app and http middleware, both pipelines are executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Service-to-service innovation middleware components work for both HTTP and gRPC endpoints.
```

spec:
  httpPipeline:
    handlers:
      - name: oauth2
        type: middleware.http.oauth2
      - name: uppercase
        type: middleware.http.uppercase
```

As with other components, middleware components can be found in the [supported Middleware reference]({{< ref supported-middleware >}}) and in the [components-contrib repo](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/tree/master/middleware/http).

{{< button page="supported-middleware" text="See all middleware components">}}

## Configuring app middleware pipelines

> You can also use any middleware components when making service-to-service invocation calls for example for token validation in a zero-trust environment, a request transformation for a specific app endpoint or to apply OAuth policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use any middleware components when making service-to-service invocation calls. For example, for token validation in a zero-trust environment, a request transformation for a specific app endpoint, or to apply OAuth policies.
```

> Service-to-service invocation middleware components apply to all outgoing calls from Dapr sidecar to the receiving application (service) as shown in the diagram below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service-to-service invocation middleware components apply to all outgoing calls from the Dapr sidecar to the receiving application (service), as shown in the diagram below.
```

<img src="/images/app-middleware.png" width=800>

> Any middleware component that can be applied to HTTP middleware can also be applied to service-to-service invocation calls as a middleware component using `appHttpPipeline` configuration. The example below adds the `uppercase` middleware component for all outgoing calls from the Dapr to the application that this configuration is applied to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any middleware component that can be applied to HTTP middleware can also be applied to service-to-service invocation calls as a middleware component using `appHttpPipeline` configuration. The example below adds the `uppercase` middleware component for all outgoing calls from the Dapr sidecar to the application that this configuration is applied to.
```
